added the data model from lakefs on the Rocks and moved to docs (#1558)
treeverse/lakeFS: docs/architecture/data-model.md

---
layout: default
title: Data Model
parent: Architecture
description: lakeFS Data Model explained
nav_order: 2
has_children: false
---
# Data Model
{: .no_toc }

## Table of contents
{: .no_toc .text-delta }

1. TOC

> {:toc}

Reviewer: This seems weird.  Is this something Jekyllish?

Author: This renders the top-of-page table of contents

Author: so, yes.

1. Being a known storage format means it’s relatively easy to generate and consume. Storing it in the object store makes it accessible to data engineering tools for analysis and distributed computation, effectively reducing the silo effect of storing it in an operational database.
1. The SSTable format supports [delta encoding for keys](https://github.com/facebook/rocksdb/wiki/PlainTable-Format#prefix-encoding){: target="_blank" } which makes them very space efficient for data lakes where many keys share the same common prefixes.

Each lakeFS commit is represented as a set of contiguous, non-overlapping SSTables that make up the entire keyspace of a repository at that commit.

## SSTable File Format ("Graveler File")

lakeFS metadata is encoded into a format called **"Graveler"** - a standardized way to encode content-addressable key value pairs. This is what a Graveler file looks like:

![Graveler File](../assets/img/graveler1.png)

Each Key/Value pair (**"ValueRecord"**) is constructed of a `key`, an `identity` and a `value`.

> A simple identity could be, for example, a sha256 hash of the value’s bytes, but it could be any sequence of bytes that uniquely identifies the value. As far as Graveler is concerned, two `ValueRecord`s are considered identical, if their key and identity fields are equal.

Reviewer: Consider explaining instead when 2 values are identical: it is true, a stronger statement, and implies this one about ValueRecords.

A Graveler file itself is content-addressable, i.e. similarly to Git, the name of the file is its identity.
File identity is calculated based on the identity of the ValueRecords the file contains:

> <b>valueRecordID = h(h(valueRecord.key) + h(valueRecord.Identity))</b><br/>

Reviewer: "+" is overloaded here (and, if this really were "+", "h(x+y)" would be no better than "x+y").  Consider using some other operator for ("structured") concatenation, perhaps `||`.  Particularly since this isn't really concatenation at almost any stage, we include lengths for software engineering reasons.

<b>fileID = h(valueRecordID<sub>1</sub> + … + valueRecordID<sub>N</sub>)</b>

## Constructing a consistent view of the keyspace (i.e., a commit)

We have 2 additional requirements for the storage format:

> 1. Be space and time efficient when creating a commit - assuming a commit changes a single object out of a billion, we don’t want to write a full snapshot of the entire repository. Ideally, we’ll be able to reuse some data files that haven’t changed to make the commit operations (in both space and time) proportional to the changeset as opposed to the total size of the repository

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Be space and time efficient when creating a commit - assuming a commit changes a single object out of a billion, we don’t want to write a full snapshot of the entire repository. Ideally, we’ll be able to reuse some data files that haven’t changed to make the commit operations (in both space and time) proportional to the changeset as opposed to the total size of the repository.
```

Reviewer: Also, this says "changeset" while below we use "diff".

> 1. Allow an efficient diff between commits which is proportional to the difference and not their absolute sizes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Allow an efficient diff between commits which runs in time proportional to the size of their difference and not their absolute sizes.
```
